mediators are still trying to reach a
ceasefire deal between Israel and Hamas
Israel says if the group rejects its
latest offer it will go ahead with a
ground attack of Rafa where more than 1
and a half million Palestinians are
Sheltering Palestinian president Mahmud
Abbas says only the US can stop Israel
from attacking Rafa speaking at the
world economic Forum he repeated calls
for an end to the war in Gaza and for
Israel to allow more Aid
in Nicholas o is chief of operations and
manager for the explosive ordinance
disposal project in Gaza he's with the
British charity humanity and inclusion
and joins us live now from outside the
Kuwait Hospital in Rafa Mr or good to
have you with us on the program how
immense is the task ahead of you right
[Music]
now hi there yeah thanks for having
me great timing um sorry the call
prayers on at the moment said I'm not
sure how this is going to get through
um it's okay Mr or you carry on talking
we can hear you can you repeat your
question please yes how you have a very
difficult task ahead of you okay
unfortunately I can't hear you can you
hear me now Mr or indeed we all do any
humanitarian action yes thank you any
humanitarian action guys at the moment
has an insurmountable task in front of
them it's going to take decades to get
this back to some kind of normality with
what we're seeing
here in terms of the ordinance that you
think has fallen and is unexploded what
sort of what sort of estimates do you
have and and where the where across the
strip is is your focus of attention
right
now well in terms of focus of attention
I have to say we we kind of um pinned to
the south of the W which is mid Gaza and
we're working throughout Bella carun and
then the top end of raer um anticipating
IDP movements through humanitarian safe
corridors back into the middle area
there up by B Balor um and again
anticipating the kind of the occupation
the IDE occupation of
Rafa and then being proactive about that
and working out areas where we can house
idps and safely give them some kind sort
of sustainability in
there in terms of the the a that you're
also focusing on that hasn't exploded or
you're trying to make areas safe uh just
describe what your your day entails when
you come across uh a piece of ordinance
that hasn't exploded what how do you how
do you work around
that yeah very good question um the
places I've been working are very
dissimilar to this this is a very Urban
populace and if you imagine the
buildings behind me and the the
um any population base at the moment
around the center of car Unice is
absolutely devastated and I've never
seen anything like it in my
time how do I respond well usually I'm
not the first person to see the
ordinance and I'm called to it through a
A system that we developed here with the
other NGO actors so try to make myself a
safe space and I try to identify and
then diagnose the item is it safe is it
armed and that kind of then
predetermined is my response to it I
require explosives to deal with
explosives and I simply don't have
access to that under the rules governing
Gaza at the moment so my response is
determined by can I mark it can I avoid
it and can I make the area safer people
who are passaging through are living in
that area and then that is the outcome
that's really all I can do without
access to other
equipment in terms of any communication
you have with uh Israel as to uh how
you're trying to disarm uh any Munitions
is there any contact between your
charitable organization the way you move
around in Gaza and uh the Israelis
themselves um I've not received the need
to it yet if there was such a need the
channels are open that's for in terms of
dealing with um unexploded ordinance or
ordinance or abandoned ordinance in
terms of movement when I move I move
with a Tracker I move move with a full
coordination of the Israeli authorities
and they are aware of my movements my
predictive movements my vehicles are
marked my people are tagged and in that
way we keep ourselves safe it's been
really good to speak to you yeah it's
been really good to speak to you I know
it's been difficult with the call to
prayer and those Israeli drones uh
hovering above you it's very difficult
for you to listen to us as well but
really appreciate your time Nicholas or
joining us from Rafa thank you
no
problem make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from aler